Hi again.
Let's turn to how to compute whether
two words are similar or not.
And we'll start in this section with
methods that use a thesaurus
to compute word similarity.
So where synonymy was a binary relation.
Two words are either synonymous or
they're not.
We often want a looser definition
of similarity or distance
that says two words are more similar
if they share more features of meaning.
But that requires they
be absolute synonyms.
And similarity,
just like synonomy is a relationship
between senses not just between words.
So we don't say that the bank
is similar to the word slope.
We say the word sense one of bank
is similar to the word fund,
actually sends three of fund,
but it actually sends
two of bank is similar to slope and
there we had two senses of bank.
So even though technically
similarities is a property of senses,
we'll find ways to compute
similarity over words as well.
Either by taking the max similarities
between senses or summing or various ways.
Now word similarity plays
a role in lots of applications.
You might want to know if two words
are similar, to grab a set of synonyms or
similar words, for the query if
someone asks information retrieval, or
for the answer in question answering.
Lots of times the translation of
a word you'll have to look for
similar words to help
find the translation.
Essay grading where
students write an essay and
you need to know what the similar
words are to the correct word for
the concept and so on,
this comes up a lot.
And in all of our applications for
word similarity,
we often distinguish Technically,
word similarity for word relatedness.
So a similar word is a near synonym, but
a related word can be related in any way.
So car and bicycle might be similar,
maybe they're not synonyms because car and
automobile are synonyms.
Car and bicycle are not quite so
close so they're similar But car and
gasoline, clearly related.
Gasoline is something that goes with cars,
but it's not similar to cars in some way.
So we're generally here looking for
similarity, but
occasionally some of the algorithms will
give you instead words that are related.
And that may or might not be useful
depending upon the application.
There are two classes of
similarity algorithms.
Thesaurus based algorithms we'll
talk about in this section
are words nearby in the hierarchy.
Or do words have similar glosses?
We'll use the the hierarchy or the glosses
as ways of defining similarity.
And distributional algorithms that
we'll talk about in the next section.
Do words have similar
distributional contexts?
So the simplest of the thesaurus based
similarly algorithm just call path
based similarity.
And I've given you a little picture
here of the WordNet hierarchy.
And here you see two concepts to senses or
synsets we call them concepts for
now, are similar if they near to each
other in this thesaurus hierarchy.
By near each other we mean have
a short path in between them.
And will define path length, somewhat
unusually we'll say a concept has a path
length one to themselves, and
two to their nearest neighbor and so on.
So the word, the concept nickel has
a path length one to nickel, two to coin,
And three to dime, because it goes one for
nickel, two to coin, three to dime.
And the path length between nickel and
coinage is similarly three and
to all the way up to money is
six to coin, to coin is to currently, to
medium exchange, down to money, and so on.
Nickels even further from Richter scale.
It goes all the way up to standard and
then down to Richter scale.
So the path length formerly
is one plus the number of
edges in the shortest path in the hypernym
graph between the sense nodes c 1 and c 2.
Now, we can turn a pathlenc,
which is a distance metric,
into simpath, a similarity metric,
simply by taking 1 over the distance.
So we'll take the pathlenc and invert it,
and we get a similarity metric.
And we can turn the sense-based metric.
Simpath is a metric Of similarity
between two senses or two concepts,
C one or C two, and
turn into a metric between
by taking the maximum similarity
among pairs of senses.
So for all sense of word one and all
sense of word two, I take the similarity
between each of those word one sense and
each of those word two senses.
And I take the maximum similarity
between those pairs and
that's the similarity between the words.
So, returning to sense-based similarity,
we've got our metric now for
path-based similarity,
one over the path length.
So, between nickel and coin,
we've a path length of 1/1 + 1,
remember we're adding 1 to the number
of inches, so it's 1/2 or 0.5.
Between fund and budget,
similarly 1/2 or 0.5.
Between nickel and currency,
we have one, two, three edges.
So, 1 / 3+1 or 4 is 0.25,
between nickel and money,
now we have 5 + 1 or 6 distance 1 / 6.
Similarity between coinage and
Richter scale, or a similarity of 1 / 6.
Or, for that matter,
between nickel, and standard.
Also 1 over 6, or
.17 Now there's a problem
with this basic path based
similarity which is that we assume that
every link represented a uniform distance.
Nickel to money somehow seems
to us it ought to be closer
than nickel to standard.
And that's because nodes that are very
high in the hierarchy are very abstract.
And like a metric that says
that nodes whose only length is
going all the way up to
the top of the hierarchy.
Those are probably not very similar words.
And to do that, we would like to represent
the cost of each edge independently.
The most common solution to
this problem is the use of
information content similarity metrics.
First proposed by Resnik in 1995.
And these define a concept P(c)
a probability of a concept c.
As the probability that a randomly
selected word in a corpus
is an instance of that concept.
And formally what I mean is that
there is a distinct random variable
that ranges over words
associated with each concept.
So every node in a hierarchy
has this random variable.
And for that concept every observed
noun is either a member of that
concept with probability of p of c or
not a member of that concept
with probability 1 minus p of c.
So every word.
Is a member of the root node, which might
be called entity, or might be called
something else in different versions
of word net or your own hierarchy.
So that means that the probability of
whatever the root node it is one, and
the probability of nodes right below the
root node are going to be very high and
the lower you get in the hierarchy,
the lower the probability.
Let's see how that works.
So here's a little piece of a hierarchy.
We've got entity here.
There's actually something above
this hierarchy in the top.
And then we have entity, then we have
down to geological formation and
then some brief notes, hill,
ridge, grotto, coast and so on.
We're going to train
information content similarity
first by training a probability p of c.
And every instance of a word like hill
counts toward the frequency of all of
its parents, of itself, obviously, but
also natural elevation, geological
formation, all the way up to entity.
So if we define the concept words (c),
words (c) is the set of all words
that are children of node c,
I should say plus c itself as well.
So, the words of natural elevation are
hill ridge and natural elevation itself.
The words of geological formation
are hill, ridge, grotto, coast, shore,
cave, natural elevation and
geological formation itself.
And now we can take, for any concept,
we sum over all the words of that concept,
so, itself and all of its children.
Sum the counts of all of those words.
And then normalize by the total
number of words in the corpus, and
that tells us the probability
of the concept.
So the probability that a random word
will be an instance of that concept.
Once we've computed these probabilities,
we can associate them with a hierarchy.
So here's probabilities computed by D.
Lin and so now we can say that the concept
coast has probability 0.0000216.
While the further up we go in
the hierarchy up to entity,
we have a probability of 0.295.
And whatever in this particular version
of WordNet was above entity will have
a probability of 1.
Now that we have probability,
we just need two more things.
We'll define the information
content of a concept
as the negative log
probability of that concept.
So we'll just following the information
theoretic definition of information there.
And we'll define the lowest
common subsumer of a node
as the lowest node in the hierarchy that
subsumes both of the very naturally.
So the lowest common subsumer of hill and
coast, think about that,
geological formation, the lowest common
subsumer of coast and shore, shore.
Now how are we going to use
this information content as
a similarity metric.
There are a number of methods,
the Resnik method.
We say that the similarity between two
words is related to how much information
they have in common, the more they have
in common, the more similar they are.
For Resnik, we just say,
what's in common in between two words
Is the information content of
the lowest common subsumer.
If I have two concepts, what's in common
between them is the thing that they
share as their inherited thing in common.
So if I just measure the amount
of information in that,
that is in fact what they have in common.
So the negative log probability of that
least common subsumer that's their
similarity, so we're define that metric
of Resnik similarity metric this way.
An alternative metric for
dealing with information theoretic
similarity is the Lin metric.
As with Resnik, the more two things have
in common, the more similar they are.
But now, the new intuition,
the more differences between A and
B, the less similar they are.
And we measure commonality by
introducing the predicate common.
Which is a proposition stating
the commonalities between A & B.
And IC, the amount of information
contained in the proposition.
And to measure the difference
between A & B, we say that the total
description of A & B,
the sum of everything we know about them,
is the sum of the commonalities
plus the differences.
So to get the differences,
we can take the description and
subtract out the commonalities.
So roughly speaking, A and B are more
similar if IC of common is high and
IC of description is low.
So the Lin similarity
between two concepts A and
B is higher when they have more in common,
less when there is a lot of other things
about them that they don't have in common.
And Lin modifies Resnik in defining the
information content of the commonality of
the two as twice the information
of their lowest common subsumer.
And so given two concepts in a hierarchy,
the Lin similarity is two times the log
probability of their least common subsumer
over the sum of the log
probabilities of the two concepts.
The total of the description that
we know about the two concepts.
Let's look at an example in
our small sample hierarchy.
We want to know the lin similarity
between the concepts hill and coast and
we look at the lowest common
geological-formation.
We take twice the log probability of that
divided by the sum of the log probability
of the two items hill and coast.
And that gives us for the Lin similarity
between hill and coast as .59.
Now a final thesaurus-based similarity
metric is called the Lesk Algorithm
after Michael Lesk who invented it is
often called lesk or extended lesk.
And this method instead
of using the hierarchy,
looks at the glosses of the words
in the dictionary or thesaurus.
And the intuition is that
two concepts are similar
if their glosses Contain similar words.
So the two word networks drawing paper and
decal have lots of similar words.
Paper that is specially prepared for
use in drafting, transferring designs from
specially prepared paper, blah blah blah.
And we have here, the words specially
prepared are in common, and
paper, in both definitions.
And so, for
each n-word phrase that's in both glosses,
the lesk algorithm adds
a score of n squared.
So paper is in both glosses, that's
a length one, so it'll add a score of one.
Specially prepared is of length two, so
it'll add a score of 2 squared or four.
So this, the total Lesk similarity
between drawing paper and decal is 5.
And in fact, with most versions of
Lesk similarity, we don't just look at
the glosses of the two words, we look at
the glosses of the words, their hypernyms,
their hyponyms and so
on and we add all that up.
So it's a sum over all the words, or
sometimes a max over all
the words of their similarity.
So in summary we've seen three
classes of thesaurus-based similarity.
Pathlen similarity where two words
are similar if there's a short path
between them in the hierarchy,
information theoretic similarity.
We've seen two methods, resnik and lin,
and there's a third one
called jiangconrath.
So these are the information
theoretic similarity.
Well we are looking at the least
common sub similar of a node,
measuring it's probability,
turning that into an information measure.
And we've seen less similarity
where given two concepts.
We take the gloss of them and
compute the overlap in words with this
kind of weighting that we talked about.
Or we might just look at the gloss as not
just of the words but of some words in
relation to those concepts like they're
hyponyms or hypernyms and so on.
And we sum all that up over
a specified set of relations and
that gives us the Lesk similarity,
or extended Lesk similarity.
There are lots of libraries for computing
these various thesaurus-based methods.
In Python and LTK has methods and
there are Python based tools
like WordNet::Similarity.
And there's even a nice web
based interfaced so that you can
check out the similarity between two
words based on different methods.
And you can go take
a look at all of these.
We evaluate similarity like many other
NLP algorithms in two different ways.
We can do intrinsic evaluation where
we can look at the metric itself and
say, how similar is
the numbers this metric gives
to what humans would give
on some similar tasks?
So I get a similarity metric for
two words, and
then I get humans to give me a number.
How similar are these two words?
And I compare those.
So that's intrinsic evaluation.
More functional is entrance, extrinsic or
task-based end-to-end evaluations
where I have some application.
I put my similarity matrix
in the application and
I see how well it
improves the application.
And that application could
be word ambiguation or
spelling error correction or SA grading.
A common simple extrinsic test that's
used is taking the test of English
as a foreign language or
TOEFL Multiple-choice vocabulary tests.
So here we have questions like,
levied is closest in meaning
to which of these four words?
And we can simply take our similarity
metric the similarity between levied and
imposed, levied and believed, levied and
requested, levied and correlated.
And see if our metric returns the right
answer, the most similar word, or
the insert is imposed.
So, thesaurus-based methods for
word similarity are a useful way of
telling if two words are similar.
They're very functional in languages
like English, where we have lots of
thesauruses either for general text in
WordNet or for medical texts in MeSH.
They work less well when we're
working in particular genres
when we might not have the right
information in the thesaurus, or
in languages for
which thesauruses are not as available.
And so for those applications we'll
turn to the distributional methods that
we'll see next.